DEVI KAVACHAM — ENGLISH TRANSLATION

Dedication (Viniyoga): Of this Śrī Caṇḍī Kavaca, Brahmā is the seer (ṛṣi), Anuṣṭup is the meter (chandas), Cāmuṇḍā is the presiding deity; the seed-syllable (bīja) is the group of Mothers as named in the body-placement rite (aṅganyāsa); the pin (kilaka) is the deity of the directional-binding (digbandha); it is recited as part of the Saptaśatī Pāṭha for the gratification of Śrī Jagadambā.

Verse 1
Om. Salutations to Caṇḍikā. Mārkaṇḍeya said: O Grandfather (Brahmā), tell me that which is the supreme secret in this world — the giver of all protection to people — which has not been revealed to anyone. (1)

Verse 2
Brahmā said: O wise one, O great sage, there is a most secret (teaching) that is beneficial to all beings — the holy Armor of the Goddess (Devī Kavaca). Listen to it. (2)

Verse 3
The first (Navadurgā) is Śailaputrī (Daughter of the Mountain); the second is Brahmacāriṇī (the Celibate Seeker); the third is called Candraghaṇṭā (the Moon-Belled); and the fourth is Kūṣmāṇḍā. (3)

Verse 4
The fifth is Skandamātā (Mother of Skanda); the sixth is Kātyāyanī; the seventh is Kālarātrī (the Night of Time); and the eighth is Mahāgaurī (the Greatly Fair One). (4)

Verse 5
The ninth is Siddhidātrī (the Giver of Perfection). These are proclaimed the nine Durgās. These names have been declared by Brahmā himself, the great-souled one. (5)

Verse 6
Those who are being burned by fire, those who have gone into the midst of enemies in battle, those in difficulty and in inaccessible places, those afflicted by fear who have taken refuge in her — (6)

Verse 7
— no misfortune whatsoever arises for them in the crisis of battle. I see no adversity, grief, sorrow or fear for them at all. (7)

Verse 8
Those who remember her with devotion — truly, growth arises for them. Those who remember you, O Goddess, you protect them without doubt. (8)

Verse 9
Cāmuṇḍā dwells among the dead (śava); Vārāhī is seated on a buffalo; Aindrī (Indrāṇī) is mounted on an elephant; Vaiṣṇavī is seated on Garuḍa. (9)

Verse 10
Māheśvarī rides a bull; Kaumārī has a peacock as her vehicle; the Goddess Lakṣmī is lotus-seated, lotus-handed, the beloved of Hari. (10)

Verse 11
The white-formed Goddess Īśvarī has a bull as her vehicle; Brāhmī is mounted on a swan and adorned with all ornaments. (11)

Verse 12
Thus all these Mothers, endowed with all powers, splendidly adorned with various ornaments and embellished with various jewels — (12)

Verse 13
— are seen mounted on chariots, the goddesses filled with righteous wrath, bearing conch, discus, mace, spear, plough and club-weapon — (13)

Verse 14
— shield, javelin, axe, noose, lance, trident, and the excellent Śārṅga bow — (14)

Verse 15
— bearing these weapons for the destruction of the bodies of demons, for granting fearlessness to devotees, and indeed for the welfare of the gods. (15)

Verse 16
Salutations to you, O greatly fierce one, of terrifying and formidable prowess, of great strength, of great enthusiasm — O destroyer of great fear! (16)

Verse 17
Protect me, O Goddess, hard to behold, O increaser of terror among enemies. May Aindrī protect me in the East; the fire-deity (Agni-devatā) in the Southeast. (17)

Verse 18
May Vārāhī protect in the South; the sword-bearer (Khaḍgadhāriṇī) in the Southwest; may Vāruṇī protect in the West; the deer-vehicle goddess (Mṛgavāhinī) in the Northwest. (18)

Verse 19
May Kaumārī protect in the North; the trident-bearer (Śūladhāriṇī) in the Northeast; may Brāhmaṇī protect me above; and Vaiṣṇavī below. (19)

Verse 20
Thus may Cāmuṇḍā, riding a corpse, protect all ten directions. May Jayā protect me in front; may Vijayā protect from behind. (20)

Verse 21
May Ajitā (the Unconquered) protect on the left side; Aparājitā (the Unconquerable) on the right. May Udyotinī (the Shining One) protect the crown-lock; Umā stands established at the crown of the head. (21)

Verse 22
May Māladhārī (the Garland-Wearer) protect the forehead; Yaśasvinī (the Glorious One) the eyebrows; Trinetrā (the Three-Eyed) the space between the eyebrows; and Yamaghaṇṭā (Bell of Yama) the nose. (22)

Verse 23
Śaṅkhinī (the Conch-Goddess) in the space between the eyes; Dvāravāsinī (the Gate-Dweller) at the ears; Kālikā (Kālī) the cheeks; and Śāṅkarī at the roots of the ears. (23)

Verse 24
Sugandhā (the Fragrant One) in the nostrils; Carcikā on the upper lip; Amṛtakalā (the Portion of Nectar) on the lower lip; and Sarasvatī on the tongue. (24)

Verse 25
May Kaumārī protect the teeth; Caṇḍikā the throat region; Citraghaṇṭā the uvula (ghaṇṭikā); and Mahāmāyā the palate. (25)

Verse 26
May Kāmākṣī protect the chin; Sarvamaṅgalā my speech; Bhadrakālī the neck; and the bow-bearer (Dhanurdharī) the spine. (26)

Verse 27
Nīlagrīvā (the Blue-Throated) outside the throat; Nalakūbarī the windpipe; may the sword-bearer (Khaḍginī) protect the shoulders; and the thunderbolt-bearer (Vajradhāriṇī) my arms. (27)

Verse 28
Daṇḍinī (the Staff-Bearer) the hands; Ambikā the fingers; Śūleśvarī (the Spear-Queen) the nails; Kuleśvarī (the Clan-Queen) the belly. (28)

Verse 29
May Mahādevī, the destroyer of mental sorrow, protect the breasts; Lalitā Devī the heart; and the trident-bearer (Śūladhāriṇī) the abdomen. (29)

Verse 30
May Kāminī (the Passionate One) protect the navel; Guhyeśvarī (the Mistress of Secrets) the private parts; Pūtanā and Kāmikā the generative organ; and Mahiṣavāhinī (the Buffalo-Rider) the anus. (30)

Verse 31
May Bhagavatī protect the waist; Vindhyavāsinī (the Dweller of the Vindhyas) the knees; and Mahābalā (the Greatly Powerful), the fulfiller of all desires, the shanks. (31)

Verse 32
Nārasiṃhī (the Lioness-Goddess) at the ankles; Taijasī on the top of the feet; Śrī in the toes; and the Under-Sole Dweller (Pādādhastala-vāsinī) below the feet. (32)

Verse 33
Daṃṣṭrākarālī (Terrible-Fanged) the nails; Ūrdhvakeśinī (the Upward-Haired) the hair; Kauberī (the goddess of Kubera) in the hair pores; and Vāgīśvarī (the Goddess of Speech) the skin. (33)

Verse 34
Pārvatī (protects) the blood, marrow, fat, flesh, bones and bodily fat; Kālarātrī the intestines; and Mukuṭeśvarī (the Crown-Queen) the bile. (34)

Verse 35
Padmāvatī in the lung-lotus; Cūḍāmaṇi in phlegm; Jvālāmukhī (the Flame-Faced) the nail-fires; and the Impenetrable One (Abhedyā) in all joints. (35)

Verse 36
May Brāhmaṇī protect my vital essence (śukra); Chatreśvarī (the Parasol-Queen) my shadow; and Dharmadhāriṇī (the Upholder of Dharma) my ego, mind and intellect. (36)

Verse 37
May Vajrahastā (the Thunderbolt-Handed) and the auspicious, beautiful Kalyāṇaśobhanā protect my prāṇa (in-breath), apāna (out-breath), vyāna (circulatory breath), udāna (ascending breath) and samāna (equalizing breath). (37)

Verse 38
May Yoginī protect (my faculties of) taste, form, smell, sound and touch; and may Nārāyaṇī always protect sattva, rajas and tamas (the three guṇas). (38)

Verse 39
May Vārāhī protect my longevity; Vaiṣṇavī my dharma (righteousness); and Cakriṇī (the Disc-Bearer) my fame, glory, fortune (Lakṣmī), wealth and knowledge. (39)

Verse 40
May Indrāṇī protect my lineage; O Caṇḍikā, protect my cattle; may Mahālakṣmī protect my sons; and may Bhairavī protect my wife. (40)

Verse 41
May Supathā (the Good-Path Goddess) protect the path; Kṣemakarī (the Safety-Giver) the road; Mahālakṣmī Vijayā (the Victorious Great Lakṣmī) at the royal gate, standing everywhere. (41)

Verse 42
Whatever place is left unprotected and unguarded by this armor — O Goddess Jayantī (the Victorious), destroyer of sins, protect all of that for me as well. (42)

Verse 43
One who desires his own good should not take a single step without (this protection). Covered with this armor always, wherever one goes — (43)

Verse 44
— there and everywhere he gains wealth and victory fulfilling all desires. Whatever desire he contemplates, that he surely obtains. A person on earth will attain incomparable supreme sovereignty. (44)

Verse 45
A mortal covered with this armor becomes fearless, undefeated in battles, and is revered in all three worlds. (45)

Verse 46
This armor of the Goddess is difficult to obtain even for the gods. One who recites it with devotion daily at the three junctions of the day (dawn, noon and dusk), endowed with faith — (46)

Verse 47
— divine power (daivī kalā) becomes his; he is undefeated in the three worlds; he lives a full hundred years, free from untimely death. (47)

Verse 48
All diseases — insect bites, eruptions and so forth — are destroyed; all poisons — stationary, mobile, and artificially prepared — (48)

Verse 49
— all sorceries, all spells and devices on the earth, beings of the earth, beings of the sky, water-born creatures and harmful instructors — (49)

Verse 50
— the innate spirits (Sahajā), the clan-born (Kulajā), Ḍākinīs, Śākinīs and the like; the sky-walkers, the terrifying Ḍākinīs of great strength — (50)

Verse 51
— malefic planets, spirits, ghosts, Yakṣas, Gandharvas, Rākṣasas, Brahma-rākṣasas, Vetālas, Kuṣmāṇḍas, Bhairavas and others — (51)

Verse 52
— all these perish at the mere sight of the one in whose heart this armor is established. Honor and elevation come to the king; it is supremely conducive to the increase of splendor. (52)

Verse 53
He grows in fame too, adorning the earth with glory. One should first don this armor and then recite the Caṇḍī Saptaśatī. (53)

Verse 54
As long as the earth bears its mountains, forests and groves, so long will his lineage of sons and grandsons remain on earth. (54)

Verse 55
At the end of bodily life, by the grace of Mahāmāyā, a person eternally attains the supreme abode which is difficult to reach even for the gods. (55)

Verse 56
He obtains the supreme form and rejoices together with Śiva. Om. (56)

